**Abstract**

This research project aims to examine the role of land in shaping and developing research libraries in the formation and maintenance of the Canadian state. To do so, I plan to use a qualitative methodology, conducting a broad literature review and historical document analysis. I plan to use the funds from this grant to hire a graduate student assistant to help me gather, review, analyze, and summarize key literature and documents related to the topic of libraries as agents of settler colonialism and capitalism in Canada. After gathering, reviewing, and analyzing this key data, I plan to create a book outline and write 2-3 chapters of the book. This research is significant because it seeks to understand the current problems of librarianship by looking at the origins of the institutions that have made the profession possible. Additionally, the research is unique because it takes a dialectical materialist perspective on the history of the profession whereas the majority of the professional literature is dominated by idealist philosophies of librarianship. 


Research Description


Problem statement/research question

This research project seeks to understand the origins of contemporary academic libraries by examining their formation and operations with respect to land as a concrete, material resource to be exploited. Specifically, this research seeks to analyze the establishment and growth of Canadian academic libraries as agents and possible resistors of the state in the five largest universities in the country. Therefore, this project seeks to answer the following research question: How have settler colonialism and capitalism been co-constitutive in the creation, growth, and maintenance of Canadian research libraries in their early years of the Canadian state? How have universities - and, by extension, their libraries - benefited from and resisted the dispossession of Indigenous peoples from their lands and from the use of vast amounts of land controlled by the Canadian government since their creation?

Background and literature review

The project seeks to contribute to the discourse around settler colonialism and North American universities examined in works like la paperson’s A Third University is Possible (2017), Patel’s No Study Without Struggle (2021), and Stein’s Unsettling the University (2022). However, these works do not theorize the role of capitalist expansion in the way settler colonial societies establish and maintain knowledge institutions. As such, they do not explicitly address librarianship as a profession that emerges simultaneously as capitalism replaced feudalism in the mid-nineteenth century. Whereas Popowich’s Confronting the Democratic Discourse of Librarianship: A Marxist Approach (2019) does historicise librarianship as a profession of capitalism, the work does not give primacy to the role of land as a critical factor necessary for Indigenous dispossession in settler colonial societies like Canada to establish and maintain knowledge institutions. 

Mary Greenshields and I co-edited a collection of essays on  this topic, which is anticipated to be published in Summer 2023 with Library Juice Press. While the volume is called Land in Libraries: Toward a Material Conception of Education, it contains chapters that discuss the notion of settler colonialism in libraries in the context of the American west (Washington, Oregon, California) and contemporary legacies of settler colonialism in the Abenaki nation of New Hampshire. Similarly, Nemec’s 2006 book Ivory towers and nationalist minds : universities, leadership, and the development of the American state and Buxton’s American philanthropy and Canadian libraries : the politics of knowledge and information (1998) contribute to the understanding of the role of capitalism in the development of universities - and by extension, their libraries - but once again, they focus on the American context rather than the Canadian one. While the experience of settler colonialism in North America shares certain key attributes (as compared to the operations of settler colonialism in Africa, Australia, or New Zealand, for example), the role of the American state is significantly different in building a nation with its knowledge infrastructure as compared to Canada, which was a colonial state. 

Further, some researchers explore the topic of settler colonialism and capitalism in the Canadian state, including Cole Harris’s A Bounded Land: Reflections on Settler Colonialism in Canada (2020).
However, they do not focus on libraries as forces of ideology and education that maintains the social relations at the core of these systems.

Works like A Century of service : librarianship in the United States and Canada, A history of higher education in Canada, 1663-1960,  and Libraries in the life of the Canadian nation, 1931-1967, provide some historical accounts of the development of library services in both the United States and Canada, but they do not approach the topic of the co-constitutive forces of settler colonialism and capitalism from a critical perspective. In other words, they treat the subject matter as a series of events rather than theorize why and how these events contributed to the establishment and maintenance of ideologies required to reinforce the Canadian state, effects of which contemporary academic libraries are seeking to redress through land acknowledgement statements and decolonization initiatives now.

Rationale and significance

Land acknowledgements and decolonization statements have proliferated in academic libraries in recent years, but these discursive practices have done little to change the operations of research libraries for marginalized communities and Indigenous peoples. There is an explosion of literature on settler colonialism in the humanities and social sciences, but LIS discussion of library theory and practice within settler colonialism and capitalism remains scant and ahistorical. This project seeks to contribute to the critical examination of libraries as institutions within the larger forces of history and power relations

I am particularly inspired by Darren Byler’s work on the digital enclosure of the Uyghurs of Northwest China in this 2022 book Terror Capitalism: Uyghur Dispossession and Masculinity in a Chinese City as it theorizes the combined operations of ethnic difference, digital surveillance, and mass confinement of a minority Muslim population by the Chinese settle colonial state. I have taught chapters of this book in LIS 530: Technology, Information and Society and CMPT 104: Introduction to Digital Fluency (MacEwan) courses, and have learned a lot about Byler’s theoretical methodology using critical theory, marxist theory, and anthropological methods to outline the problem with precision and clarity. While my project does not explicitly focus on First Nations and Metis peoples on whose lands Canadian universities were built, Byler’s work is useful in providing a framework for approaching a complex social problem from an interdisciplinary perspective. This is crucial with working with a graduate student in order to keep the research goal of the project in focus.

Methodology and data management

I plan to use an interdisciplinary approach using historical, political science, and LIS research methods within a marxist theoretical framework. Primary methods include literature review, website content analysis, as well as historical and archival document analysis. 

Data gathered will be stored on a shared UAlberta Google Drive and accessed by myself and the research assistant. The qualitative software will be a web-based subscription to Atlas.ti platform. Any data used on the web-based qualitative analysis tool will be removed before the license expires. After this research project is completed, data gathered will be available only to me as the lead investigator. Structured data sets that do not include any identifiable, sensitive, or personal data (as no human subjects are involved) produced over the course of the project will be deposited into relevant repositories, such as University of Alberta’s Dataverse instance in Borealis and/or the Educational Research Archive. Data produced over the course of this project will be stored in the dedicated Google Drive folder for at least five years, after which time it may be deleted.

Dissemination plan

This funding request for this project seeks to assist the investigator in creating an outline for a book and the writing of 2-3 core chapters which can then be proposed to an academic publisher, such as the University of Alberta Press, University of Athabasca Press, or Routledge. Thus, the immediate dissemination plan is a presentation at Congress SSH 2024 and University of Alberta Open Ideas of the results of this year-long study. However, the long-term goal of this project is the publication of a book synthesizing the results of this interdisciplinary, historical research. 
